Add initial governance documents (#1)
geopandas/governance: Governance.md

possible, decisions about project direction are made by community consensus.
Some members of the community additionally contribute by serving as [GeoPandas
Project Maintainers](#project-maintainers), where they are responsible for
facilitating the everyday activities of the project, or on the
[GeoPandas Steering Council](#steering-council), where they are
responsible for facilitating the establishment of community consensus, for
stewarding project resources, and – in extreme cases – for making project
decisions if the normal community-based process breaks down.

## The Project

The GeoPandas Project (The Project) is an open source software project
affiliated with the 501(c)3 [NumFOCUS Foundation](https://numfocus.org/).
The primary goal of The Project is to develop support for geospatial data in
[Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) objects. Software developed by The Project
is released under the BSD (or similar) open source license, developed openly,
and hosted on public GitHub repositories under the
[GeoPandas GitHub organization](https://github.com/geopandas).
In addition to the main [GeoPandas repository](https://github.com/geopandas/geopandas),

> the GeoPandas project includes subprojects focused on geospatial I/O, geospatial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the GeoPandas project includes subprojects focused on geospatial input/output, geospatial
```

Given the number of users who come to geopandas without much software background, I'd not necessarily assume everyone immediately knows what I/O means here.

data exploration and visualization, and parallelized geospatial computations.

The Project is developed by a team of distributed Contributors. Contributors are
individuals who have contributed code, participated in GitHub Issues, Pull
Requests, and Discussions, or provided community help/building, education,
outreach, and other activities that benefit the Project and the Community.

> Anyone can be a Contributor, and contributors can be affiliated with any legal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyone can be a Contributor, and Contributors can be affiliated with any legal
```

I don't quite understand why Contributor is being capitalized in this section, but given it is, I assume it should be capitalized here too.

concerns exist after a period of time appropriate for the scope of the change,
we will assume that consensus has been reached. If we find that a given change
is more controversial than expected or a critical input is delayed because
someone was unavailable, we can back out or further modify those changes based
on the additional feedback.

If necessary, a formal veto should consist of:

-   an unambiguous statement that a veto is being invoked
-   an explanation of why it is being invoked
-   a description of what conditions (if any) would convince the vetoer to
    withdraw their veto

We expect that most people will take this responsibility seriously and only
invoke their veto when they judge that a serious problem is being ignored and
that their veto is necessary to protect The Project. We expect such vetoes to be
rare in practice because Contributors are motivated from the start to find some
solution that everyone can live with.

If all proposals for resolving some issue are vetoed, then the status quo wins
by default. In the worst case, if a Contributor is genuinely misusing their veto
in an obstructive fashion to the detriment of the project, then they can be

> ejected from the project by consensus of the Steering Council – see below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ejected from the project by consensus of the Steering Council in the process described in the **Council Membership** section.
```

Author: I think the "see below" was referring more to the Steering Council section than the process by which consensus is determined.  Since this occurs in the same section where we describe consensus, I think we can omit a reference back to it.  Which then leaves us with 

```Markdown
then they can be ejected from the project by consensus of the Steering Council.
```

(dropping further qualification)

Reviewer 2: Sure, that works!

For more information about the overall approach we use to achieve consensus, we
highly recommend that all Contributors additionally read
[Chapter 4: Social and Political Infrastructure](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#social-infrastructure)
of Karl Fogel's classic Producing Open Source Software, and in particular the
section on
[Consensus-based Democracy](http://producingoss.com/en/producingoss.html#consensus-democracy),
for a more detailed discussion.

### Project Maintainers

Project Maintainers are Project Contributors that have shown that they are
dedicated to the ongoing development of the project through active engagement
with the Community and facilitation of everyday Project activities. Maintainers

> are granted write access to one or more repositories within The Project, provide

Reviewer 3: Can we have maintainers that don't have write access to one of the repos? (for example, hypothetically if in the future we would have a communication team and they don't use github for managing twitter etc) Although since we have geopandas/community and this governance repo, every maintainer can always have write access to some repo ..

Author: Good point; I think we can just say "are typically granted write access" in this case.

feedback on Github Issues and Discussions, review and merge Pull Requests,
participate in monthly Community Meetings, vote on Steering Council members, and

> may be actively involved in setting the overall direction of the project.

Reviewer 3: In practice, we would also like to encourage that other contributors from the community also provide feedback / review / participate in meetings. So I am wondering to what extent explicitly calling this out here gives the impression that this is "unique" to maintainers?

Author: We mention the community meetings in more detail above in the Project section; here we are just referring back to that.  Maybe we can add

```markdown
... participate in monthly Community Meetings (which are open to all members of the community), ...
```

to make that more clear?

Project Maintainers are nominated by other Project Maintainers by sending a
notification to the Project Maintainer's private mailing list. Other Project
Maintainers will have a period of at least two weeks in which to veto a
nomination; otherwise, the nominee shall become a Project Maintainer. No voting
is necessary for selecting Project Maintainers.

Project Maintainers who have not actively contributed to The Project for a
period of 12 months will be asked if they wish to resign their write access and
voting rights until they become active again.

Project Maintainers may have their write access and voting rights revoked by the
Steering Council if they are deemed to be actively harmful to The Project's

> well-being, and attempts at communication and conflict resolution have failed.

Reviewer 3: Should that go through code of conduct committee? (or mention that this can also be a way for their rights to be revoked?)

Author: I think that is implicitly handled under `attempts at communication and conflict resolution` but we can make that more explicit by adding

```markdown
Depending on the nature of the conflict, if any, the Code of Conduct
Subcommittee may be involved in conflict resolution or specifically recommend
revoking a Maintainer's write access and voting rights. 
```

Reviewer 4: I think that it is fair to explicitly mention that this should go through the CoC committee.

include, but are not limited to code, code review, participation in GitHub
Issues, Pull Requests, and Discussions, community help/building, education,
outreach, and other activities that benefit the Project and the Community. We
want to encourage a diverse array of backgrounds, talents, and perspectives on
the Council, which is why we explicitly do not define code or code-related
metrics as the sole metric on which Council membership will be evaluated.

Any former Council member can be considered for membership again at any time in
the future, like any other Project Contributor; there is no maximum term length.

If a Council member becomes inactive in the project for a period of one year,
they will be considered for removal from the Council. Before removal, they will
be contacted to determine if they plan on returning to active participation. If
not, they will be removed immediately upon a vote of the remaining Council
members, and their vacancy will be filled in the process outlined above.

The Council reserves the right to eject current Members if they are deemed to be
actively harmful to The Project's well-being, and attempts at communication and

> conflict resolution have failed. This requires the consensus of the remaining

Reviewer 2: Just to be sure, is this "consensus" in the same definition as the technical decision-making process as described above? That is, a Member could veto an ejection of another Member?

Author: Implicitly, probably yes. 

How about 

```Markdown
This requires the consensus (as described above) of the remaining Members.
```

    outside of The Project that may influence their work on The Project
-   access to proprietary information of their employer that could potentially
    leak into their work with The Project

All members of the Council shall disclose to the rest of the Council any
conflict of interest they may have. Members with a conflict of interest in a
particular issue may participate in Council discussions on that issue but must
recuse themselves from voting on the issue.

#### Subcommittees

The Council can create subcommittees that provide leadership and guidance for
specific aspects of the project. Subcommittees may include non-Council members
as appropriate. Like the Council as a whole, subcommittees should conduct their
business in an open and public manner unless privacy is specifically called for.
Private subcommittee communications should happen on the main private mailing
list of the Council unless specifically called for.

The Project shall have a Code of Conduct Subcommittee responsible for
maintaining the [GeoPandas Code of Conduct](CodeOfConduct.md), responding to
reports of Code of Conduct Violations, and enforcing Code of Conduct Violations.

> This subcommittee shall not be entirely composed of Steering Council Members.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, I think we should try to minimize overlap in practice. I know this can be hard in volunteer organizations, but the load of a CoC member should (hopefully!) be much lower than that for a Council member, so it may be easier to solicit them from the community.

We anticipate that changes to these Governance documents will be rare and will
warrant careful consideration, except in the case of typos or minor language
errors.

Any member of the Community may suggest a change to these Governance documents
by opening a GitHub Issue on the GeoPandas Governance repository. The Steering
Council may elect not to pursue changes outlined in the issue and may close the
issue with a brief explanation of that choice.

A member of the Steering Council may then formulate a GitHub Pull Request with
specific changes to these Governance documents. The Steering Council may solicit
input from the person that initially raised the issue and/or other members of
the Community. Only Steering Council members may open a Pull Request on this
repository. Pull Requests by any other Contributor (except in the case of very
minor typo or language fixes) may be immediately closed by the Steering Council

> without further explanation.

Reviewer 3: Is it needed to explicitly restrict this? (as long as it are the council members that merge a change, does it matter who wrote / submitted it?)

Author: I think this came out of prior discussion but I likely misinterpreted the intent.  So long as only steering council members merge it, and so long as there isn't undue noise coming from too many open PRs on this front, then it seems fine for anyone to open PRs.  Can always be restricted later if it becomes problematic.
